# Conclusions and Further Research

## Summary

The primary goal of this thesis was to evaluate and understand the
performance and behavior of Grammatical Evolution (GE) by using a number
of different search methodologies. In the course of this research, six
different metaheuristics were evaluated Genetic Algorithms (GA),
Evolutionary Strategies (ES), Evolutionary Programming (EP), Random
Search (RS), Hill Climbing (HC) and Simulated Annealing (SA). These
evaluations were conducted on four benchmark GP problems, Symbolic
Integration, Santa Fe Trail, Blocks and Symbolic Regression.

Chapter two introduced the mechanics of GE and explained much of the
associated terminology giving particular emphasis to concepts associated
with language grammars. Concepts like genetic code degeneracy, neutral
mutation, and expressed and un-expressed genes, which are referenced
throughout the text, were introduced.

In chapter three we introduced the chosen metaheuristics, HC, SA, GA,
RS, GA, ES and EP, presenting each with a discussion on the origin of
the method, the key strategy choices, operators and a detailed step by
step guide to the algorithms involved.

The problem domains were introduced in chapter four with an explanation
of the objective of the problems and a presentation in Backaus Naur Form
of each of the grammars used to attempt to solve the problems.

Each of the six chapters from five through to ten focused on a
particular metaheuristic. A similar pattern was used for each looking
first at the search strategy options, then considering the parameters
used to configure the algorithms, presentation of the results and some
discussion on aspects of the metaheuristic that could be refined or
tuned to improve the success rate.

In chapter eleven we looked comparatively at the results, contrasting
the performance of the different metaheuristics on each of the problems,
looking at the nature of the search space encountered by the search
strategies and looking at characteristics of the successful solutions
found. The latter part of this chapter focused on more detailed analysis
of some of the more successful metaheuristics GA, ES and EP. Finally, we
looked at the wrapping and tried to understand aspects of the problems
and their grammars that might contribute to it prominence in some
results and its absence in others.

## Conclusions

The relationship between problems, grammars and GE is a complex one.
While this research has shown that many different search strategies can
be used successfully with GE, it is difficult to extract universal
learnings that guarantee improvements across all classes of problems. We
can, however, say that population based methods have a distinct
advantage as evidenced from the performance of EP, ES and GA. These
metaheuristics clearly outperformed the local search based approaches of
HC and SA. Indeed, any attempts to try and improve the performance of HC
and SA through variation in the search strategy options for these
methods yielded little improvement. While the performance of the local
search approaches was disappointing, the performance of RS was
surprisingly strong, significantly out performing HC and SA on the three
problems that it managed to solve.

GA was the best search strategy to solve the Symbolic Regression
problem, successfully solving it in 36% of attempts. EP and ES also
solved this problem at lower success rates. Overall, GA was more
successful on the chosen problems, with little to differentiate the
performances of the EP and ES.

We analaysed the contribution of the various GA operators in an effort
to understand some of the factors that contributed toward its success
and found that crossover was key to the performance of the algorithm
with the removal of mutation, duplication and swap having lower levels
of influence on success rates. A significant difference in the emergence
of successful solutions in GA as opposed to HC and SA, was the fact that
GA solutions typically emerged from mid to high fitness parents while
successful solutions from the local search approach emerged from areas
of low fitness.

While operator by operator analysis revealed that the contribution of
crossover was seen as key to the performance of GA, a comparative
analysis of GA and EP revealed that the performance of GA without
crossover can be significantly boosted by the introduction of fixed
length genomes. It is also significant that the form of intermediate
recombination favoured by ES in our trials is potentially much more
disruptive an operator than the one-point crossover used by GA. This,
coupled with the fact that EP used no recombination at all, would tend
to suggest that to some degree all of the operators in isolation are
dispensable to some degree, the key to success being the global search
approach offered by the population based nature of these methods.

ES had similar levels of performance to GA, with Symbolic Regression
being the only problem in which we saw any significant difference.
Intermediate recombination and a *plus* selection strategy was clearly
the most successful form of ES and an analysis of successful solutions
from ES showed no wrapping being used in any of the successful
solutions.

EP introduced a second strategy variable that controlled where in the
genome string the mutation would occur, however, this proved counter
productive and best results were achieved with the standard form of
adaptive mutation that we had used previously in ES. Despite the absence
of a recombination operator, which had proved essential in maintaining
GA performance, results for EP were not significantly worse that those
of GA and ES. One of the most curious features of the EP results was the
re-emergence of wrapping in the Santa Fe and Blocks problems despite the
fact that the length of genome presented to the search strategies was
longer than the number of codons required for a successful solution.

Our attempts to profile the problem search spaces and our evidence from
the various search strategies used suggest complex, noisy, discontinuous
multimodal landscapes. These landscapes prove difficult for the
deterministic gradient following approaches of HC and SA, while the
global approach of GA, EP and ES cope significantly better. With the
exception of the Blocks problem, we saw solutions to our selected
problems exist as sharp isolated peaks of maximum fitness, and further
evidence from our use of RS to sample the search space suggest that some
of the problems have a high density of such peaks.

One of the most significant things to emerge from this research was the
recognition of GE's ability to work successfully and seamlessly with a
broad range of different search approaches. This establishes it as a
powerful and flexible mechanism for the automatic generation of grammar
based code and programs.

## Future Directions

An area requiring a more complete analysis is the relationship between
grammars and wrapping. In this research we have tried to understand some
of the factors that influence wrapping. The relationship between the
various factors that contribute to its emergence in certain problems is
complex. We saw in two of the problems, Santa Fe and Blocks, a tendency
toward solutions that are considerably longer than the minimum number of
codons required. This is facilitated primarily by nesting of
conditionals and by sequences of redundant code. We did establish that
wrapping is not purely related to the required number of codons in a
given solution. This was evident when we tried to force Symbolic
Integration to use wrapping by presenting it with short genome lengths
only to see it fail at every attempt, unable to complete a solution
through wrapping.

We have attempted to shed some light on some of the factors that
contribute toward the emergence of wrapping, however we believe that the
most fruitful area for further research into this behaviour lies in the
selection and construction of specific problem grammars that use
constructs like conditionals and repetition. Additionally the design of
the grammar is proving increasingly important with evidence that layout
and sequencing are strongly influencing linkage within the grammar
effecting production selection bias.

The performance of RS on at least three of the problems brings into
question their suitability as bench mark problems. While the population
based methods have proved more successful on these particular problems
there is no guarantee that these results will hold true for more complex
problems. Future studies in both GE and GP would be better served by
moving away from these particular problems.

While much work was done in the optimisation and in various search
strategy options were introduced in this for the three most successful
population based methods much work remains in the analysis and
optimisation of these methods. Approaches like EP and ES offer the
opportunity of strategy variables evolving with the emerging solutions,
as our knowledge of the inner workings of GE continues to grow these
strategy variables could be used to exploit this knowledge by
engineering the search in a particular direction, some modest attempts
at this have already been attempted in this research. The analysis of a
population based approach to SA and HC would also be an interesting
avenue of investigation given their dependence on a good starting point
and the proven success of population based algorithms.
