# Simulated Annealing

## Introduction

The Simulated Annealing search algorithm is examined in this chapter,
looking initially at the strategy options and configuration choices. The
results section shows the performance of the algorithm in preliminary
trials with a range of annealing schedules before presenting the results
of the main trials.

## Search Strategy Options

To be consistent with efforts of Random Search and Hill Climbing we
again limit each trial to 25000 evaluations of the objective function.
The operators used for Simulated Annealing are those that were used with
Hill Climbing, however we have reduced the probability of occurrence of
the shrink and grow operators based on our observations regarding
duplication of solutions as discussed in
Section [\[duplicate_solutions\]](#duplicate_solutions){reference-type="ref"
reference="duplicate_solutions"}.

The approach in general is similar to Hill Climbing, as the operators
have been selected to allow fine-grained exploration of the search space
while exploiting the capability of Simulated Annealing to avoid the
pitfalls of local optima. The principle strategy choice for Simulated
Annealing will be the selection of a suitable annealing schedule (see
Section [\[schedule\]](#schedule){reference-type="ref"
reference="schedule"}), this is covered in detail in
Section [1.4](#schedule_selection){reference-type="ref"
reference="schedule_selection"}.

## Experimental Conditions

Table [1.1](#sa_param_table){reference-type="ref"
reference="sa_param_table"} shows the parameters used to configure
Simulated Annealing. Symbolic Integration, Santa Fe and Blocks use
initial Genome lengths of 100 while Symbolic Regression uses an initial
length of 200. A temperature change rate of 0.95 is used to reduce the
temperature on each iteration. A minimum temperature of *0* is used to
halt the annealing schedule. For a more complete explanation
Section [\[sa_algorithm\]](#sa_algorithm){reference-type="ref"
reference="sa_algorithm"} provides a step-by-step guide to the
algorithm.

::: center
::: {#sa_param_table}
  Parameter                  Problems                       
  -------------------------- ---------- ---------- -------- ---------
                             Sym Int    Santa Fe   Blocks   Sym Reg
  Number of Trials           1000       1000       1000     1000
  Number of Objective                                       
  Function Evaluations       25000      25000      25000    25000
  Initial Genome Length      100        100        100      200
  Variation Range            10%        10%        10%      10%
  Zero Improvement Accept    off        off        off      off
  Probability of Selecting                                  
  Shrink Operator            .05        .05        .05      .05
  Probability of Selecting                                  
  Grow Operator              .05        .05        .05      .05
  Probability of Selecting                                  
  Force-up Operator          .45        .45        .45      .45
  Probability of Selecting                                  
  Force-down Operator        .45        .45        .45      .45
  Temperature Change Rate    0.95       0.95       0.95     0.95
  Minimum Temperature        0          0          0        0

  : [\[sa_param_table\]]{#sa_param_table label="sa_param_table"}
  Parameters used for the Simulated Annealing Search Algorithm.
:::
:::

## Establishing an Annealing Schedule {#schedule_selection}

The establishment of an appropriate annealing schedule for each of the
problems centres on selecting the desired level of probability for
acceptance of a dis-improving solution. At a temperature $t$, the
probability $P$ for a change in energy of magnitude $\delta E$ is given
by

$$P(\delta E) = e ^{ \frac{-\delta E}{kt}}$$

Figure [\[santafe_accept_prob_score_delta\]](#santafe_accept_prob_score_delta){reference-type="ref"
reference="santafe_accept_prob_score_delta"} shows the change in the
probability of accepting a dis-improving solution for a range of score
deltas. Three different temperatures have been shown. If it was possible
to predict the type of score deltas we were likely to see in the course
of a trial then we could usefully employ this information to select a
suitable starting temperature. We know from the analysis of the Hill
Climbing results that solutions often emerge from areas of the solution
landscape where scores are low score. This might suggest that it is
reasonable to accept large dis-improving deltas late in a trial. However
this policy would also have the consequence of having us accept even
larger score deltas early in a trial, this could force the search to
remain trapped in sub optimal regions of the search space.

This is better illustrated in
Figure [\[santafe_accept_prob_score_temp\]](#santafe_accept_prob_score_temp){reference-type="ref"
reference="santafe_accept_prob_score_temp"} which again shows the change
in the probability of accepting a dis-improving solution but this time
it has been plotted against increasing temperature. Three plots for
score deltas of 1, 5 and 10 have been included. Again we see some of the
trade offs in this graph a high starting temperature exposes the search
to higher probabilities of moving into low scoring regions of the search
space while starting with a very low temperatures might leave the search
unable to effectively explore the search space because of a overly
captious approach.

 

 

In order to get some indication of suitable annealing schedules for the
problems a limited number of runs were first performed for a range of
starting temperatures. The number of iterations at each temperature
accordingly varied in order to maintain our limit of 25000 evaluations
of the objective function in a single trial. The results of these
preliminary runs plus the results of the extended runs are presented in
the next section.

## Results

Tables [1.2](#sa_symint_sched_table){reference-type="ref"
reference="sa_symint_sched_table"}, [1.3](#sa_santafe_sched_table){reference-type="ref"
reference="sa_santafe_sched_table"}
and [1.4](#sa_blocks_sched_table){reference-type="ref"
reference="sa_blocks_sched_table"} show the results from the preliminary
trials used to determine the appropriate annealing schedule for Symbolic
Integration, Santa Fe and Blocks respectively. Similar runs on the
Symbolic Regression problem failed to find any correct solutions.

These preliminary trials consisted of 500 runs for each start
temperature. The table shows the starting temperature and the number of
successes achieved.

For the case of Symbolic Integration the success rate appears to peak at
11% for starting temperatures of 1 with the success rate trailing off
either side of this. On the Santa Fe problem we see a plateau of similar
scores for temperatures of 1 or less with a significant fall off in
success rates for higher starting temperatures. The schedules for Blocks
follows a similar pattern to that of Santa Fe showing higher success
rates at starting temperatures of one or less. The Symbolic Regression
problem was not solved in any of the preliminary trials.

::: center
::: {#sa_symint_sched_table}
  Starting Temperature   Successful Runs
  ---------------------- -----------------
  0.3                    10%
  0.1                    6%
  1                      11%
  5                      5%
  10                     2%

  : [\[sa_symint_sched_table\]]{#sa_symint_sched_table
  label="sa_symint_sched_table"} Results from 500 trials of Simulated
  Annealing on the Symbolic Integration Problem for a Range of Starting
  Temperatures.
:::
:::

::: center
::: {#sa_santafe_sched_table}
  Starting Temperature   Successful Runs
  ---------------------- -----------------
  0.3                    17%
  0.1                    20%
  1                      19%
  5                      4%
  10                     5%

  : [\[sa_santafe_sched_table\]]{#sa_santafe_sched_table
  label="sa_santafe_sched_table"} Results from 500 trials of Simulated
  Annealing on the Santa Fe Trail Problem for a Range of Starting
  Temperatures.
:::
:::

::: center
::: {#sa_blocks_sched_table}
  Starting Temperature   Successful Runs
  ---------------------- -----------------
  0.1                    11%
  0.3                    13%
  1                      12%
  5                      6%
  10                     9%

  : [\[sa_blocks_sched_table\]]{#sa_blocks_sched_table
  label="sa_blocks_sched_table"} Results from 500 trials of Simulated
  Annealing on the Blocks Problem for a Range of Starting Temperatures.
:::
:::

Table [1.5](#sa_results_table){reference-type="ref"
reference="sa_results_table"} provides a summary of the final results
for Simulated Annealing. 1000 runs were performed using most successful
starting temperature of 1 from the preliminary trials. Symbolic
Regression was not solved in any of the attempts, however Symbolic
Integration and Blocks have similar success rates scoring 11% and 13%
respectively, while Santa Fe scores 21%. While the algorithm is more
successful on the Symbolic Integration and Santa Fe problems than Hill
Climbing, the overall results are still poor relative to those of Random
Search.

::: center
::: {#sa_results_table}
  Problem                Successful Runs
  ---------------------- -----------------
  Symbolic Integration   11%
  Santa Fe Trail         21%
  Blocks                 13%
  Symbolic Regression    0%
  Spirals                0%

  :  [\[sa_results_table\]]{#sa_results_table label="sa_results_table"}
  Results from the Simulated Annealing Trials.
:::
:::

## Characteristics of Solutions found by Simulated Annealing

Table [1.6](#sa_results_analysis_table){reference-type="ref"
reference="sa_results_analysis_table"} shows details of the solutions
found by Simulated Annealing, wrapping features prominently in Santa Fe
and Blocks. The average solution length for Santa Fe is 58 codons of
which 48 are expressed. Symbolic Integration has solutions with an
average genome length of 76 of which only 19 are expressed. An aspect of
the results from the Blocks problem is that the number of expressed
codons was 91, which is considerably greater than the average number of
codons in a solution at 54. This aspect of the Block's results is caused
by multiple wrap events where the codons are repeatedly re-used until a
successful solution is found.

::: center
::: {#sa_results_analysis_table}
  Feature                   Sym Int   Santa Fe   Blocks   Sym Reg
  ------------------------- --------- ---------- -------- ---------
  Avg Number of Codons                                    
  in Solution               76        58         54       n/a
  Avg Number of expressed                                 
  Codons in Solution        19        48         91       n/a
  Avg Number of Solutions                                 
  featuring Wrapping        0%        50%        66%      n/a

  : [\[sa_results_analysis_table\]]{#sa_results_analysis_table
  label="sa_results_analysis_table"} Analysis of Characteristics from
  Solutions found by Simulated Annealing.
:::
:::

### Analysis of search trajectory

A typical search trajectory for a Simulated Annealing trial is shown in
 [\[sa_search1\]](#sa_search1){reference-type="ref"
reference="sa_search1"}. In the early stages the algorithm explores
areas of both low and high fitness but as the trials progresses we see a
steady climb to areas of high fitness as the decreasing temperature
reduces the probability of selecting dis-improving solutions.

 

## Summary

In this chapter we have looked at Simulated Annealing, a metaheuristic,
which models itself on the way crystals form in solids during the
cooling process. The principle strategy choice for the method was the
selection of a suitable annealing schedule, to assist this selection a
number of preliminary trials were performed using a range of starting
temperatures. The final results showed unsuccessful attempts on two of
the problem, Symbolic Regression and Spirals and low success rates on
the other three.

The additional capability of Simulated Annealing to avoid sub-optima
would appear to have added little or no improvement on the scores
achieved by Hill Climbing, leaving it a considerable way behind Random
Search.
